# Mihai Berevoescu's revision 2.4c Lynx HIB repair
This document is organized in order of the process of the repair

## 2026-02-18
Who am I?  
I am a friend of #28260 Coral Tech FTC team. I help them with ideas and
technical knowledge. I work in IT industry. Over the years I did and still do software 
development for embedded devices, networking, telemetry, digital forensics and digital research.
I also have a passion to understand how things works and digging into electronic devices
has been a hobby of mine since I was in elementary school. I have no official role on the team and I
explicitly requested not to be included as a mentor, but I assured them I will be there to 
support them if they need help. We were together when this story began...

How I got into this:  
The team only has 2 and a half batteries.
I say half because one is at least 4 years old.
It fully charges in under 10 minutes at 1A and lasts almost 20 seconds 
on a robot until the hub complains about low voltage. <!-- FIX: What? For those of you who build robots and compete
in FTC, you may know how many functional tests you do, how many code uploads and how
many thousands of autonomy scenarios and adjustments you make. -->

To avoid changing and charging our two good batteries, we thought it would be better to power our robot from a power supply while we program and test it. We didn't power it from a chinese power supply or worse, directly from a battery charger. We
found a stabilized lab power supply with adjustable voltage and current limiting. It worked
perfectly, but it could only supply 5A which is not enough to move
the robot. Our solution? A 6-pack of 2.7V/500F super capacitors. This solved the problem of instant
power delivery to the motors. When the power supply source cannot deliver all the power, energy
stored in capacitors makes up the difference. When the robot stops moving, they are recharged.
It worked flawlessly for months.

Then on the fatal day, we pressed the official REV switch to turn on the robot like hundreds of times before.
I always look at the hub to see if the led
goes blue to confirm the power is on. It didn't turn on this time and I think I heard a 
hissing sound<!--  (it wasn't perfectly quiet, there were people around moving and talking) -->. I turned
it off in about 2 seconds because something didn't look right. I looked at the wires 
to check if we connected something wrong. Maybe something wasn't isolated correctly or there was some other issue.
Nothing was wrong, so we turned it back on again. Both the Expansion Hub and the Servo 
Power Module started, but Control Hub refused and its LED stayed off. We saw a little
smoke coming out of of the hub.

The first question on our lips was: what the #^(! just happened? (this word was removed
because it breaks FIRST's code of Gracious Professionalism). We saw this happen to another
team, during a competition, no more than 3 weeks ago. They were forced to abandon 
and were disqualified. There was clearly a catastrophic failure
happened inside the Control Hub and we had
regionals in 2 weeks. Only the REV Robotics can officially repair a 
broken Control Hub and we are in the EU while REV is in the US, so we could not get it repaired in time. The next day we ordered
a new Control Hub from the EU supplier which came in 3 days, but meanwhile we thought we should open
the broken one to try to repair it. 

We assumed that a buck converter IC exploded because
they are prone to fail on startup due to high inrush current or to high transient
voltage generated by the bounce of a mechanical switch. [Here](https://www.pololu.com/docs/0j16/all)
is a great explanation about transients and LC spikes. We removed the exploded TPS562209
3.3V buck regulator and we measured resistance across the rail on the terminals of the C63. It was about 1 ohm.
Bad news, something had died and created a short between 3.3V and ground. 

We took our lab power supply, set it to 3.3V 150mA and applied power to the rail. The power supply
entered its current limiting mode and the voltage dropped under 1V. We slowly increased the
current to about 700mA to find the short by finding which part heats up. We noticed that the main
microcontroller of the board, the TM4C123GH6PGE, got hot. We removed it from the board and the short
circuit disappeared. The rest of the board pulled about 180mA and nothing else got hot. 
The failure mode was now clear: 12V rushed into 3.3V rail. Unfortunately, most of the HIB is powered
off 3.3V rail, so a lot of the board was probably dead. Next, we checked the USB Bridge by connecting
the board to a computer. If it was working, then it would have appeared in Device Manager, but nothing did.
Despite the mess on the HIB, the compute board was still working, but it could not communicate with
HIB.

We came to the theory that the perfect conditions generated by switch bounce combined
with wire lengths and external capacitors created at a spike in the input voltage 
exceeding 17V. Above this threshold, the upside MOSFET inside the TPS562209 failed into a short, letting unregulated
voltage to flow into 3.3V rail. Another theory is that TPS562209 encountered an unexpected
condition when it tried to start under an unstable input voltage generated by switch bounce and opened
both upside and downside power MOS transistors at the same time, causing one of them to fail.
In either case, in milliseconds, everything failed and TPS562209 exploded. 

This situation could have been prevented by adding a properly rated TVS diode before the buck, adding a TVS diode
after the buck, or by increasing the TPS562209's startup delay above 1ms by adding a RC bridge
on the EN pin. With knowledge that their board will be used with
a certain mechanical switch between the battery and the board, REV really should have accounted for this problem.
This regulator is starting under heavy load due to all components connected on 3.3V rail, including the small capacitors
scattered all over the board which will demand a high current in first milliseconds after power on to charge.
As you may already guessed so far, the external 20A fuse from the power line still survived after this event.

The difference between a pack of supercaps and a battery is the ESR or internal resistance.
One supercap has an ESR of about 5 mOhms, so a pack of six should have about 25 mOhms. A NiMH 
battery cell is around 8-12 mOhms when new, so a pack of 10 series cells should be 80-120mOhm. This
would limit the inrush current to only about 120A (in theory) instead 480A provided by capacitors, either
case is way too much to prevent 3.3V buck failure. This is why I think the capacitors
were not the root cause, but they were a factor. Since we saw a hub fail
the same way at an official competition, using an official goBilda battery, we are inclined to
believe this is a design error not compensating for an edge-case event rather than improper use.

The plan for the future follows:  
 1) Check transistors, diodes and resistors on the board with a multimeter to see any abnormal values
 1) Replace the main microcontroller TM4C123GH6PGE and add JTAG connector to the board
 2) Try to upload firmware into it with JTAG (power the board using limited current, using lab source)
 3) Check if is booting up, check if it says anything on serial debug interface(s)
 4) Add 12V power to the board, check if the compute board is still alive using supplied power from Lynx
 5) Connect the compute board to check if the communication between boards is still working
 6) Check if 5V rail is still working
 7) Check RS485 and USB, replace the IC if necessary (I strongly believe it will be)
 8) Add a new IMU board, connected externally to I2C bus 0, because this board uses a BGA IMU and
       I am not confident I will be able to resolder it in place.
 9) Add 3.3V buck converter, TPS562209, and verify that whole hub runs under its own power

The board I own is a newer version of the board that Duck Tape and a Prayer has worked on. It
includes the new IMU chip and also a Winbond 25Q64 serial flash which still works. I don't
know its role on the board and I assume it has been added for future development of the new IMU
chip. The data inside is almost all 0xFF with only a couple of KB written. Inside this data you can 
find the strings "The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog" and "This is a test. This is only
a test"

## 2026-03-12
We resoldered both the processor and the FT230XQ-R USB-TO-SERIAL converter back in place.
Unfortunately, I had only two FT230XQs and I damaged the first one in the soldering process.
The temperature too high and the case melted. The second one was put in place and recognized by computer
when connected to USB. TI programming software (LMFlashProgrammer) did not communicate with target
and future attempts to resolder the FT230XQ did not work well, so the second FT230XQ became damaged.

For debugging purposes I connected a cheap USB-to-SERIAL converter to UART 0  with a baudrate of 115200, 8/N/1.
UART0 can be connected to near the edge of the board.
     
Future investigations revealed that 0.55V was present on RESET_MCU pin, holding the
processor in the reset state. I soldered a JTAG connector and connected to a FT2232H board already
configured for ESP32 programming/debugging. Since all the standard JTAG signals were
configured on this board, I was able to get CPUID out of JTAG chain. This is a part of the result
(with reset pulled down by a broken IC):

```
Info : JTAG tap: lm3s.cpu tap/device found: 0x4ba00477 (mfg: 0x23b (ARM Ltd), part: 0xba00, ver: 0x4)
Info : DAP transaction stalled (WAIT) - slowing down
Info : DAP transaction stalled during replay (WAIT) - resending
```

The part pulling down the RESET_MCU pin was a SN74LVC8T245, a bus voltage
level converter. After U22 was removed from board, the voltage on that pin rose to 3.3V and
OpenOCD successfully connected to target.

To save your time and to not repeat my mistakes, you should check, before attempt
to program the microcontroller, the following:
- each VDD pin is at 3.3V. Check *each and every pin*
- each GND pin is at 0V
- both VDDC pins are about 1.2V
- nRST pin is at 3.3V
- also VDDA should have 3.3V

Even if the FT230XQ is not present on my board, the 3.3V rail is still powered from the USB 5V if
there is no battery plugged in. The power is extracted from USB connector via PUSBM5V5,
routed to TPS562209, and then buck-converted to 3.3V.

I had another issue
yesterday where the board rebooted when trying to start task #8/12 PWM and Servo in my test program. Fortunately, when I
changed the computer I was using the board worked correctly. I don't know what caused
the boot loop yesterday and I have no intention to investigate since it is working now.

As I presumed earlier, all the 3.3V logic is dead, including the level shifters,
the IMU, the RS485 and the USB converters. In the following weeks, I will try to replace what can be
replaced (except BHI260 IMU, which is too small, along with its counterpart BMM150
magnetometer which is even smaller)

### 2026-03-16
Yesterday I completed repairing the board. I made a cable connected to a double
10k potentiometer to test both analog and digital input ports. I connected two LEDs
across VCC and the digital pins to test the digital outputs. I tested the I2C ports with 
a goBilda Pinpoint. To test the USB-to-Serial bridge, I connected it to a computer and to test the RS485 interface I connected it
to an Expansion Hub. I found no way to test these functions of the device without a computer or an Expansion Hub.

I replaced two dead CPDV5-5V0U 5V diodes with CPDV5-3V3Us on digital ports
1 & 3 because the 3.3V version was all I had. I hope I won't encounter any
problems in the future if I don't use any 5V device on those ports.

Here is a detailed list of broken/replaced parts (prices from mouser.com / one piece):
 - U20 TM4C123GH6PGEI7 - main MCU ($16.32)
 - U23 TPS562209 - SMPS for 3.3V rail ($0.74)
 - U15 FT230XQ-R - USB-to-Serial bridge ($2.26)
 - U21 & U22 SN74LVC8T245 - bus level shifter (2x $1.79)
 - U5 & U6 - CPDV5-5V0U - ESD protection diodes (2x $0.28)

Strangely both the BHI260 (IMU) and ST3485EB (RS485 transceiver) survived. I 
presume that the components that failed protected these ones by shorting to ground and
lowering the voltage to a safe level.

While checking the datasheets of TPS562209 and SMF17A (the TVS diode set up to protect from this kind
of a voltage spike), I discovered that TPS562209 should accept transients up to 27.5V on VBST
and 21.0V on SW, but only for 10ns. This may be the key aspect why it wasn't well protected by SMF17A,
which does not have a well defined clamping time or an accurate graph of voltage vs time. The
times are expressed in milliseconds (fig.4 - pulse waveform), or at best microseconds (fig.2 - peak pulse
rating curve), which is a few orders of magnitude higher than 10ns that the TPS can handle. I intend
to use an additional and larger TVS such as a 1.5KE18CA outside the hub near its power plug combined with a few ohms resistor/NTC to limit startup current.
I used ChatGPT and Claude to help me understand the exact mechanism of avalanche TVS, breakdown
voltage, local silicon energy hotspots, material degradation and other concepts. I learned
that the response time of a TVS should be around 50ps, which in theory is more than good enough
to protect the circuit, but the MOSFET can experience avalanche so in the end the truth
may be somewhere in the middle.

What can be done to prevent such an event to happen again:  
1. REV Robotics could change the TPS562209 3.3V buck converter to use 
TPS54202, doubling the maximum input voltage rating for LC transients and
making the device less prone to failure. According to Mouser, the unit price of TPS54202 
is $0.987/100 pieces and the price for TPS562209 is $0.418/100pcs. The overall cost of
this improvement is less than $0.60/unit but it saves inestimable time and money for FTC
teams. These chips are pin compatible and shouldn't require any changes to the board.
2. REV Robotics could add a RC bridge to /EN pin of TPS562209 which would cause it to start
a few milliseconds later. This *may* prevent the upside MOSFET from breaking down
because it would not be conducting when the transient voltage appears. I had some issues
with a board I designed for automotive use years ago where more than half of the devices
failed because the LMR14206 was burned up at startup (car battery replacement, plug disconnect/reconnect).
It has a maximum rating of 45V. After adding 2x1M resistors and 100nf capacitor to /SHDN pin to enable soft start,
the issue never happened again. This requires a board change and should be considered 
only for a new version of the Lynx.
3. Regular users can build a transient suppressing device from a NTC, a TVS
and a bypass relay. The whole idea of this device is to limit inrush current and
kill any LC oscillation at startup without limiting the high current required to run
motors. When the mechanical switch is closed the voltage travels through
NTC, any oscillation is killed by its startup resistance and any transient which may
happen (less likely, but just in case) is shorted to ground by TVS. After a few
milliseconds the relay closes and bypasses the NTC, keeping is cool for the next 
power-up cycle. The current drawn at startup by REV Control Hub is about 400mA/12V
and a B57364S0259M054 NTC combined with 1.5KE18CA TVS and a simple 12V relay should
protect any Control Hub, Expansion Hub and other device powered from any 12V power source.
In the photos folder you can find a schematic of such a device. I intend to build one because
we will need to use supercaps again while building and testing future robots. Be aware
that you are not allowed to use such a device in competition!
4. REV Robotics may add a 5V TVS on the 3.3V rail not to prevent burning the SMPS
but to limit the damage. A 1.5KE6.8V should protect all the components on 3.3V rail
by helping TPS562209 to burn faster when fails, without damaging sensitive devices.
It don't know if it would really work, but it's an idea.
5. Also a change to cascading power feeding could be considered for a new design, where
the only device that may experience transients would be the 12V to 5V SMPS, then the voltage would be
subsequently lowered to 3.3V. Something like 12V --> 5V --> 3.3V. Usually the 5V SMPS have
higher maximum ratings and even if it does fail the 3.3V one will protect the
small & sensitive 3.3V logic. The drawback of this design is that any shorted device
powered from that 5V rail, such as servos, will cause a voltage drop in 3.3V rail and Lynx board may
experience an unexpected reset.

In the end I would like to suggest a test for Q&A team of the REV Robotics if 
someone on their side ever reads this document: I presume you already have a couple 
of test devices which you use for software development, to upload your nightly changes, 
your RC versions, and to make regression testing. You may use a standard relay to 
power-up each test device for a few days, to simulate normal on/off power cycle of standard
usage of the product, one cycle every 2 seconds. Then observe if any of your test
devices breaks in the process. I strongly suggest to use a very low-ESR power supply
because a device should not rely on the internal resistance of the battery pack. Maybe
someday in the future FTC will allow LiPo batteries and their internal resistance will
be very close to what we experienced with supercaps.